README.md, before:

# proxy-memoize

[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/dai-shi/proxy-memoize/CI)](https://github.com/dai-shi/proxy-memoize/actions?query=workflow%3ACI)
[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/proxy-memoize)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/proxy-memoize)
[![size](https://img.shields.io/bundlephobia/minzip/proxy-memoize)](https://bundlephobia.com/result?p=proxy-memoize)

Intuitive magical memoization library with Proxy and WeakMap

## Project status

The API is complete. Unless we find some major issues, it will be fixed.
Before reaching v1, we would like to collect more bug reports
and best practices.
There are no obvious/known issues at the moment, but there are some
[limitations and workarounds](#limitations-and-workarounds).

## Introduction

In frontend framework like React, object immutability is important.
JavaScript itself doesn't support forcing immutability.
Several libraries help encouraging immutable coding style,
like [immer](https://github.com/immerjs/immer).
While immer helps updating an object,
this library helps creating a derived value from an object, a.k.a. selector.

This library utilizes Proxy and WeakMap, and provides memoization.
The memoized function will re-evaluate the original function
only if the used part of argument (object) is changed.
It's intuitive in a sense and magical in another sense.

## Install

```bash
npm install proxy-memoize
```

## How it behaves

```js
import memoize from 'proxy-memoize';

const fn = memoize(x => ({ sum: x.a + x.b, diff: x.a - x.b }));

fn({ a: 2, b: 1, c: 1 }); // ---> { sum: 3, diff: 1 }
fn({ a: 3, b: 1, c: 1 }); // ---> { sum: 4, diff: 2 }
fn({ a: 3, b: 1, c: 9 }); // ---> { sum: 4, diff: 2 } (returning a cached value)
fn({ a: 4, b: 1, c: 9 }); // ---> { sum: 5, diff: 3 }

fn({ a: 1, b: 2 }) === fn({ a: 1, b: 2 }); // ---> true
```

## Usage with React Context

Instead of bare useMemo.

```js
const Component = (props) => {
  const [state, dispatch] = useContext(MyContext);
  const render = useCallback(memoize(([props, state]) => (
    <div>
      {/* render with props and state */}
    </div>
  )), [dispatch]);
  return render([props, state]);
};

const App = ({ children }) => (
  <MyContext.Provider value={useReducer(reducer, initialState)}>
    {children}
  </MyContext.Provider>
);
```

-   [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-vrnze)

## Usage with React Redux

Instead of [reselect](https://github.com/reduxjs/reselect).

```js
import { useSelector } from 'react-redux';

const getScore = memoize(state => ({
  score: heavyComputation(state.a + state.b),
  createdAt: Date.now(),
}));

const Component = ({ id }) => {
  const { score, title } = useSelector(useCallback(memoize(state => ({
    score: getScore(state),
    title: state.titles[id],
  })), [id]));
  return <div>{score.score} {score.createdAt} {title}</div>;
};
```

-   [CodeSandbox 1](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-c1021)
-   [CodeSandbox 2](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-fi5ni)

## Usage with Zustand

For derived values.

```js
import create from 'zustand';

const useStore = create(set => ({
  valueA,
  valueB,
  // ...
}));

const getDerivedValueA = memoize(state => heavyComputation(state.valueA))
const getDerivedValueB = memoize(state => heavyComputation(state.valueB))
const getTotal = state => getDerivedValueA(state) + getDerivedValueB(state)

const Component = () => {
  const total = useStore(getTotal)
  return <div>{total}</div>;
};
```

-   [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-yo00p)

## API

<!-- Generated by documentation.js. Update this documentation by updating the source code. -->

### memoize

Create a memoized function

#### Parameters

-   `fn` **function (obj: Obj): Result** 
-   `options` **{size: [number](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number)?}?** 

#### Examples

```javascript
import memoize from 'proxy-memoize';

const fn = memoize(obj => ({ sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b }));
```

Returns **function (obj: Obj): Result** 

### getUntrackedObject

This is to unwrap a proxy object and return an original object.
It returns null if not relevant.

#### Examples

```javascript
import memoize, { getUntrackedObject } from 'proxy-memoize';

const fn = memoize(obj => {
  console.log(getUntrackedObject(obj));
  return { sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b };
});
```

## Limitations and workarounds

### Inside the function, objects are wrapped by proxies and touching a property will record it.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  console.log(obj.c); // this will mark ".c" as used
  return { sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b };
});
```

A workaround is to unwrap a proxy.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  console.log(getUntrackedObject(obj).c);
  return { sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b };
});
```

### Memoized function will unwrap proxies in the return value only if it consists of plain objects/arrays.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  return { x: obj.a, y: { z: [obj.b, obj.c] } }; // plain objects
});
```

In this case above, the return value is clean, however, see the following.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  return { x: new Set([obj.a]), y: new Map([['z', obj.b]]) }; // not plain
});
```

We can't unwrap Set/Map or other non-plain objects.
The problem is when `obj.a` is an object (which will be wrapped by a proxy)
and touching its property will record the usage, which leads
unexpected behavior.
If `obj.a` is a primitive value, there's no problem.

There's no workaround.
Please be advised to use only plain objects/arrays.
Nested objects/arrays are OK.

## Comparison

### Reselect

Here's a simple example in reselect.

```js
import { createSelector } from 'reselect';

const mySelector = createSelector(
  state => state.values.value1,
  state => state.values.value2,
  (value1, value2) => value1 + value2,
);
```

This can be written as follows.

```js
import memoize from 'proxy-memoize';

const mySelector = createSelector(
  state => state.values.value1 + state.values.value2,
);
```

Another example from reselect.

```js
const subtotalSelector = createSelector(
  state => state.shop.items,
  items => items.reduce((acc, item) => acc + item.value, 0),
);

const taxSelector = createSelector(
  subtotalSelector,
  state => state.shop.taxPercent,
  (subtotal, taxPercent) => subtotal * (taxPercent / 100),
);

export const totalSelector = createSelector(
  subtotalSelector,
  taxSelector,
  (subtotal, tax) => ({ total: subtotal + tax }),
);
```

This can be converted to something like this.

```js
export const totalSelector = memoize(state => {
  const subtotal = state.shop.item.reduce((acc, item) => acc + item.value, 0);
  const tax = subtotal * (state.shop.taxPercent / 100);
  return { total: subtotal + tax };
);
```

Finally, see this example.

```js
const todoTextsSelector = memoize(state => state.todos.map(todo => todo.text));
```

This can't be written in reselect.

## Related projects

-   [react-tracked](https://github.com/dai-shi/react-tracked)
-   [reactive-react-redux](https://github.com/dai-shi/reactive-react-redux)
-   [svelte3-redux](https://github.com/dai-shi/svelte3-redux)
-   [memoize-state](https://github.com/theKashey/memoize-state)
-   [valtio](https://github.com/pmndrs/valtio)

Commit message:

add notes for the unstable export

README.md, after:

# proxy-memoize

[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/dai-shi/proxy-memoize/CI)](https://github.com/dai-shi/proxy-memoize/actions?query=workflow%3ACI)
[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/proxy-memoize)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/proxy-memoize)
[![size](https://img.shields.io/bundlephobia/minzip/proxy-memoize)](https://bundlephobia.com/result?p=proxy-memoize)

Intuitive magical memoization library with Proxy and WeakMap

## Project status

The API is complete. Unless we find some major issues, it will be fixed.
Before reaching v1, we would like to collect more bug reports
and best practices.
There are no obvious/known issues at the moment, but there are some
[limitations and workarounds](#limitations-and-workarounds).

## Introduction

In frontend framework like React, object immutability is important.
JavaScript itself doesn't support forcing immutability.
Several libraries help encouraging immutable coding style,
like [immer](https://github.com/immerjs/immer).
While immer helps updating an object,
this library helps creating a derived value from an object, a.k.a. selector.

This library utilizes Proxy and WeakMap, and provides memoization.
The memoized function will re-evaluate the original function
only if the used part of argument (object) is changed.
It's intuitive in a sense and magical in another sense.

## Install

```bash
npm install proxy-memoize
```

## How it behaves

```js
import memoize from 'proxy-memoize';

const fn = memoize(x => ({ sum: x.a + x.b, diff: x.a - x.b }));

fn({ a: 2, b: 1, c: 1 }); // ---> { sum: 3, diff: 1 }
fn({ a: 3, b: 1, c: 1 }); // ---> { sum: 4, diff: 2 }
fn({ a: 3, b: 1, c: 9 }); // ---> { sum: 4, diff: 2 } (returning a cached value)
fn({ a: 4, b: 1, c: 9 }); // ---> { sum: 5, diff: 3 }

fn({ a: 1, b: 2 }) === fn({ a: 1, b: 2 }); // ---> true
```

## Usage with React Context

Instead of bare useMemo.

```js
const Component = (props) => {
  const [state, dispatch] = useContext(MyContext);
  const render = useCallback(memoize(([props, state]) => (
    <div>
      {/* render with props and state */}
    </div>
  )), [dispatch]);
  return render([props, state]);
};

const App = ({ children }) => (
  <MyContext.Provider value={useReducer(reducer, initialState)}>
    {children}
  </MyContext.Provider>
);
```

-   [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-vrnze)

## Usage with React Redux

Instead of [reselect](https://github.com/reduxjs/reselect).

```js
import { useSelector } from 'react-redux';

const getScore = memoize(state => ({
  score: heavyComputation(state.a + state.b),
  createdAt: Date.now(),
}));

const Component = ({ id }) => {
  const { score, title } = useSelector(useCallback(memoize(state => ({
    score: getScore(state),
    title: state.titles[id],
  })), [id]));
  return <div>{score.score} {score.createdAt} {title}</div>;
};
```

-   [CodeSandbox 1](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-c1021)
-   [CodeSandbox 2](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-fi5ni)

## Usage with Zustand

For derived values.

```js
import create from 'zustand';

const useStore = create(set => ({
  valueA,
  valueB,
  // ...
}));

const getDerivedValueA = memoize(state => heavyComputation(state.valueA))
const getDerivedValueB = memoize(state => heavyComputation(state.valueB))
const getTotal = state => getDerivedValueA(state) + getDerivedValueB(state)

const Component = () => {
  const total = useStore(getTotal)
  return <div>{total}</div>;
};
```

-   [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/s/proxy-memoize-demo-yo00p)

## API

<!-- Generated by documentation.js. Update this documentation by updating the source code. -->

### memoize

Create a memoized function

#### Parameters

-   `fn` **function (obj: Obj): Result** 
-   `options` **{size: [number](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number)?}?** 

#### Examples

```javascript
import memoize from 'proxy-memoize';

const fn = memoize(obj => ({ sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b }));
```

Returns **function (obj: Obj): Result** 

### getUntrackedObject

This is to unwrap a proxy object and return an original object.
It returns null if not relevant.

[Notes]
This function is for debugging purpose.
It's not supposed to be used in production and it's subject to change.

#### Examples

```javascript
import memoize, { getUntrackedObject } from 'proxy-memoize';

const fn = memoize(obj => {
  console.log(getUntrackedObject(obj));
  return { sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b };
});
```

## Limitations and workarounds

### Inside the function, objects are wrapped by proxies and touching a property will record it.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  console.log(obj.c); // this will mark ".c" as used
  return { sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b };
});
```

A workaround is to unwrap a proxy.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  console.log(getUntrackedObject(obj).c);
  return { sum: obj.a + obj.b, diff: obj.a - obj.b };
});
```

### Memoized function will unwrap proxies in the return value only if it consists of plain objects/arrays.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  return { x: obj.a, y: { z: [obj.b, obj.c] } }; // plain objects
});
```

In this case above, the return value is clean, however, see the following.

```js
const fn = memoize(obj => {
  return { x: new Set([obj.a]), y: new Map([['z', obj.b]]) }; // not plain
});
```

We can't unwrap Set/Map or other non-plain objects.
The problem is when `obj.a` is an object (which will be wrapped by a proxy)
and touching its property will record the usage, which leads
unexpected behavior.
If `obj.a` is a primitive value, there's no problem.

There's no workaround.
Please be advised to use only plain objects/arrays.
Nested objects/arrays are OK.

## Comparison

### Reselect

Here's a simple example in reselect.

```js
import { createSelector } from 'reselect';

const mySelector = createSelector(
  state => state.values.value1,
  state => state.values.value2,
  (value1, value2) => value1 + value2,
);
```

This can be written as follows.

```js
import memoize from 'proxy-memoize';

const mySelector = createSelector(
  state => state.values.value1 + state.values.value2,
);
```

Another example from reselect.

```js
const subtotalSelector = createSelector(
  state => state.shop.items,
  items => items.reduce((acc, item) => acc + item.value, 0),
);

const taxSelector = createSelector(
  subtotalSelector,
  state => state.shop.taxPercent,
  (subtotal, taxPercent) => subtotal * (taxPercent / 100),
);

export const totalSelector = createSelector(
  subtotalSelector,
  taxSelector,
  (subtotal, tax) => ({ total: subtotal + tax }),
);
```

This can be converted to something like this.

```js
export const totalSelector = memoize(state => {
  const subtotal = state.shop.item.reduce((acc, item) => acc + item.value, 0);
  const tax = subtotal * (state.shop.taxPercent / 100);
  return { total: subtotal + tax };
);
```

Finally, see this example.

```js
const todoTextsSelector = memoize(state => state.todos.map(todo => todo.text));
```

This can't be written in reselect.

## Related projects

-   [react-tracked](https://github.com/dai-shi/react-tracked)
-   [reactive-react-redux](https://github.com/dai-shi/reactive-react-redux)
-   [svelte3-redux](https://github.com/dai-shi/svelte3-redux)
-   [memoize-state](https://github.com/theKashey/memoize-state)
-   [valtio](https://github.com/pmndrs/valtio)
